(chapter:citi-training)=
# CITI Training

The Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) provides
peer-reviewed courses to educate researchers about ethical and legal best
practices for human subjects research. Originally a partnership between the
University of Miami and the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, CITI now
coordinates with academic and government institutions nationwide.

[CITI]: https://citiprogram.org/

Before you begin any medical or human subjects research, make sure to complete
the required CITI training courses, which vary depending on the nature of the
research. If you're unsure which courses are required, contact your principal
investigator, department chair, or institutional review board (IRB).

:::{warning}
Take your CITI training seriously---it's very easy to accidentally expose
protected data in ways that are impossible to undo.
:::

To get started, register for an account on the [CITI Program website][CITI],
making sure to do so as an affiliate of UC Davis. At UC Davis, CITI's
"Biomedical Research - Basic" course is a minimum requirement to conduct
biomedical research. To enroll:

1. Log into the [CITI Program website][CITI] with your UC Davis-affiliated
   account.
2. Find the list of courses you've taken for UC Davis. You can usually find
   this from the "My Courses" page.
3. Find and click on the "Add a Course" link. You can usually find this at the
   bottom of the list of courses.
4. Check the box for "I need to enroll in required Institutional Review Board
   (IRB) training". Review the other options and click "Next" when you're done.
5. Select the box for "Basic Course of Biomedical Researchers". Review the
   other options and click "Next" when you're done.
6. Answer whether you are engaged in a clinical trial as part of the research
   and click "Next" when you're done.

At this point, you should be able to confirm that you are enrolling in the
"Biomedical Research - Basic" course for "Biomedical Researchers and Staff".
Complete the course (it will take a few hours to read through the material and
answer the quiz questions) and save your completion certificates somewhere
(they will also be emailed to you). In the future, you may need to provide
those certificates to the IRB or UC Davis administrators to prove you completed
the course. This course is valid for 3 years, after which you'll be prompted to
complete a refresher course.


## Standards of Practice for Biomedical Research

For human subjects research, the [Belmont Report][belmont] provides
peer-reviewed guidelines and ethical principles.

For biomedical research that uses statistical models, including artificial
intelligence (AI), the [TRIPOD + AI Paper][tripod] provides peer-reviewed
standards of practice.

[belmont]: https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/belmont-report/
[tripod]: https://www.tripod-statement.org/


## Working with Protected Data

The University of California, UC Davis, and UCDH all have policies to protect
sensitive data such as personally identifiable information (PII) and protected
health information (PHI). Because these policies exist at several different
levels of the organization, they might seem confusing or intimidating, but
they're all meant to enforce the basic principle that that must there be no
unauthorized access to protected data.

The systems and procedures described in this guide exist so that protected data
can be stored securely on servers owned by UCDH and located on UCDH property,
while still allowing authorized researchers to do their work even if they're
not physically at the hospital. Completing CITI training, as explained in the
preceding section, is a prerequisite to working with protected data.

The University of California classifies data into [4
categories][uc-protected-data], called **protection levels**, depending on the
potential impact of disclosure or compromise. Protection level 1 (P1) consists
of data that would have relatively low impact, such as data already publicly
available, while protection level 4 (P4) consists of highly sensitive data,
such as medical records and financial records.

[uc-protected-data]: https://security.ucdavis.edu/data-classification-four-protection-levels
